## Mental Health Awareness

### Introduction

In December 2019, the first human cases of COVID-19 were reported by officials in Wuhan City, China1. At that moment, people all over the world were afraid that the virus would spread in their countries, Puerto Rico wasn’t an exception. At the end of February 2020, the virus was in Puerto Rico and spreading fast. To try and stop the spread, the government placed an executive order of lockdown, which is still happening. The first few weeks were rigorous, everything was closed and people weren’t working, people were supposed to stay at their homes 24/7. As weeks passed by, places were starting to open with the appropriate precautions, students were in online classes, etc. Some weeks the government had to enforce the executive order because people weren’t following orders. In all that time and still is happening, confirmed cases of the virus exponentially increasing, people dying, health professionals(doctors, nursers, etc.) at their breaking points, most people out of jobs because their working places were closed and consequently they were out of money, students struggling from their online classes and the public in general couldn’t go out to do recreational activities to clear their minds. People getting exposed to these events due to the lockdown and the pandemic, has a great effect on their mental health, either directly or indirectly happening to them. 

### Problem Statement

Mental health is just as important as physical health. According to a survey, due to the emergency of COVID-19 pandemic, 93% of countries worldwide halted critical mental health services while its demand was increasing. COVID-19 has interrupted essential mental health services around the world just when they needed the most. Now that in-person services have become difficult, many health professionals have opted for telemedicine, which provides more or less the same services as an in-person appointment but through a phone call or even a video call. The use of telemedicine in Puerto Rico has been fast-tracked due to the pandemic. Telemedicine would provide more help to everyone and especially those who are on remote places on the island since they won’t have to go in-person, assuming they have some kind of smart device at their disposal. The demand for mental health services in Puerto Rico has been increasing in these last years. The Category 5 hurricane María in September 2017 and the earthquakes in earlier 2020, with the combined current health concerns and the ensuing economic fallout, are detonators for myriad mental health problems like depression and anxiety. 

Users involved will be people that already have problems affecting their mental health and people that seek help. Assuming they have a smart device and are somewhat proficient with it, a simple system will be built either way for their understanding. The users’ age range goes from 18 and older. The idea is to use the “boom” from telemedicine and redirect it to provide mental health services that are needed now. Users will be able to hold meetings either with a professional in the mental health area and/or group meetings with other users. 

### Project Objectives

The main objective of this project is to create an app with certain features that the “Sanvello” application is currently missing. “Sanvello” is an existing application that offers users to chat with groups chats as a support group. Also, allows users to post how they feel and other users would comment positive thoughts. We would like for psychologists to be more involved in this kind of activity. Such as the “Línea PAS” app, which allows users to chat or call an employee of the application. 

- Provide a Video Chat Rooms feature to allow users and their assigned psychologist to communicate with audio and visual. The feature would also allow the psychologist to create a virtual meeting with more than one patient at the same time. Which is known as a group therapy session, where the psychologist would be treating all their patients at once. This way the patients are able to hide who they are and become more comfortable receiving therapy.
- Fully implement a feature that would allow Psychologists and other users to post content related to a category. For example, a user can post how they feel during depression, this post will fall into the depression category. Then other users or psychologists are able to comment on that post for morale support or guidance.  Another example is for a psychologist to post information and/or videos that would be about steps on how to cure from anxiety. Such posts will fall into the category of Anxiety. Once the previously mentioned details are met, we will consider this feature completed.
- Create a section within the app with information of psychologists registered in this app and live in Puerto Rico. Users would be able to send a request to be their patient. Once the selected psychologist accepts they will be able to start scheduling meetings to chat or have a virtual meeting.

### Contributors

- César Justiniano-Santiago; [@CesarJustiniano](https://github.com/CesarJustiniano)
- Edwin Borrero-Santiago; [@edwinborrero](https://github.com/edwinborrero)
- Edgar Rivera-Hernandez; [@Ed-Rivera117](https://github.com/Ed-Rivera117)
